# CFPB YMYG Toolkit - Module 7 Credit
# Source: cfpb_ymyg_module_7_credit

MODULE 7 
Understanding Credit 
Reports and Scores 
Building a positive credit history (which is measured 
through credit reports and scores) can help you when 
getting a job or approval for housing or a loan. 
At a glance 
This module explains the importance of credit reports and scores and reviews ways 
to improve and maintain your credit history. 
 Requesting your free credit reports 
 Reviewing your credit reports 
 Disputing errors on your credit reports 
 Getting and keeping a good credit history 
Introduction 
The concept of “credit” can be complicated. People sometimes confuse the words 
debt and credit because they both have to do with borrowing money. 
A simplified way to tell them apart is to think of credit as the ability to borrow 
money and repay it later, while debt is the money that you have to repay when 
you’ve used credit. You can have credit available to use without having debt. For 
example, you may have a credit card that is paid off—meaning you have credit 
available to use but don’t owe any debt. 
Having a problem with credit reporting? 
You can submit a complaint and we’ll forward it to the company and work to get you a response. 
Submit online at consumerfinance.gov/complaint or by calling (855) 411-2372. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
152 


--- Page 154 ---
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
When you take out a credit card or other loan, you create (or add to) your credit 
history. Sometimes when people talk about their financial situation, they say they 
have “good credit” or “bad credit.” This usually refers to their credit history. 
Credit reporting companies gather information from your credit history into a 
credit report. A credit report may show some of your bill payment history, along 
with some public record information and a record of how often you have applied 
for credit. 
A credit report may also show how much available credit you have, how much of 
your available credit you’re using, whether you have made your payments on time, 
and whether debt collectors have reported that they’re attempting to collect debt 
that you owe. 
The information in your credit report is used to create credit scores. Many lenders 
use credit scores to decide how much money they can lend you and how much 
interest to charge. In general, the higher your credit score, the better the loan 
terms may be. 
Why do credit reports and scores matter? 
Some people say credit reports and scores don’t matter to them because they 
don’t plan to get a loan. But the information in your credit reports is also used to 
make other kinds of decisions about you. 
A poor credit history can make it difficult for you to: 
• 
Get a job 
• 
Get and keep a security clearance for a job, including a military position 
• 
Get an apartment 
• 
Get insurance coverage 
• 
Pay lower deposits on utilities and get better terms on cell phone plans 
• 
Get a credit card 
• 
Improve your credit score (because the information used to calculate your 
scores comes from your credit history) 
Having a poor credit history or low credit scores can create obstacles for you, such 
as costing you more money in terms of the price you will pay for loans, credit cards, 
and other services. 
One reason it’s important to pay bills on time is to create a positive credit history 
and boost your credit scores. You also need to pay attention to what’s in your 
153 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 155 ---
 
 
  
 
 
credit reports. Since credit scores are calculated based on the information in the 
reports, take the time at least once a year to make sure the information in your 
reports is accurate. You can do this for free. Use the “Requesting your free credit 
reports” tool in this module to get started. 
Credit reports 
WHAT’S IN A CREDIT REPORT? 
Credit reporting companies collect information about you from many sources, 
including “furnishers.” Furnishers are people or companies that provide 
information about your credit, banking, payment history, and other behavior. 
Each of the three nationwide credit reporting companies—Equifax, Experian, and 
TransUnion—collects information about you to make their own credit report. So if 
you have credit, you will likely have more than one credit report. 
It’s important to make sure that the information listed about you is accurate with all 
three companies. Sometimes information about you isn’t reported to every credit 
reporting company, causing differences among your reports. 
HOW IS MY CREDIT REPORT USED? 
Lenders use credit reports to help them decide whether to loan you money and 
what interest rates they’ll offer you. They also use your credit reports to determine 
whether you still meet the terms of an existing credit account. 
Other businesses might use your credit reports to determine whether to offer you 
insurance; approve you to rent a house or apartment; or provide you with cable TV, 
Internet, utility service, or a cell phone plan. If you agree to let an employer look at 
your credit report, it could also be used to make employment decisions about you. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
154 


--- Page 156 ---
 
  
  
  
Remove your name from mailed pre-screened credit offers by opting out at  
(888) 567-8688 or online at optoutprescreen.com. 
Choose the “5-year” removal option to prevent pre-screened offers from falling 
into other people’s hands for five years – or make a request by mail if you want to 
opt out permanently. 
Negative information on your credit report 
Negative information, like a history of late payments or bankruptcy, can affect your 
ability to get credit and affect the terms of the loan offers you get. Usually this 
kind of negative information can appear on your credit report only for a specified 
period of time—seven years for most items. 
A bankruptcy can stay on your credit report for up to 10 years. For civil suits and 
judgments, such as back child support payments, the information can appear on 
your credit report for seven years or until the statute of limitations has expired, 
whichever is longer. 
Positive information, like a history of on-time payments, can stay on your credit 
report forever. 
While there are usually time limits on how long negative information can appear 
on your credit report, most consumer reporting companies are allowed to keep 
negative information about you in their files forever. They do this because there 
is no time limit on information (positive or negative) that a consumer reporting 
company may include in your credit report when you are applying for: 
• Credit of $150,000 or more 
• Life insurance with a face value of $150,000 or more 
• A job with an annual salary of $75,000 or more 
EXAMPLE CREDIT REPORT 
Each of the three nationwide credit reporting companies presents information in 
a slightly different way. This is an example of a credit report that highlights the key 
sections you’ll find in all three companies’ credit reports. It’s an example credit 
report and isn’t based on the format of any one specific credit reporting company. 
Each company’s format varies in layout, look, and level of detail reported. 
155 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 157 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Header/Identifying information 
File number: 12345678 
Date issued: 9/30/2017 
Personal information 
Name: Miguel Smith 
SSN: XXX-XX-1234 
Other names: 
Miguel S Smith 
Miguel Simon Smith 
Date of birth: 12-1-1980 
Telephone number: 555-555-1000 
Addresses reported: 
457 First Street, Littletown, MI 09876 13476 
Avenue A, Big City, WI 43526 
Employment data reported 
Employer name: Riviera Restaurants 
Position: Manager 
Date reported: 3/2013 
Hired: 11/2010 
Employer: Freer Chiropractic College 
Date reported: 6/2008 
Position: Food services 
Hired: 3/2008 
INCLUDES: 
• Name 
• Current address 
• Social Security number 
• Date and place of birth 
• Employment history (this may not include 
all past jobs, but what's listed should be 
accurate) 
DOESN’T INCLUDE: 
• Information such as race or ethnicity 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
156 


--- Page 158 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Public record information 
Public records 
Big City Wisconsin Court Docket# 200900001467  
515 C St, NE, Big City, WI 43528 
 
Date filed: 8/3/2019 
Amount: $11,987 
Type: Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
Responsibility: Individual 
Big City Municipal Court Docket #200700056712 
4326 Fourth Street, SW, Big City, WI 43530 
Date filed: 4/14/2017 
Amount: $4,763 
Type: Civil Judgment 
Responsibility: Individual 
Plaintiff: Bank of Big City 
Plaintiff attorney: Lisa Perry 
Collections 
Reliable collections (Y76381): Account #3629 
Original creditor: ABC Megastore 
Amount placed: $2,500 
Opened: 7/2/2018 
Account type: Open 
Balance: $1,000 
Responsibility: Individual 
INCLUDES: 
• Financial public records such as consumer 
bankruptcies, judgments, state and federal 
tax liens 
DOESN’T INCLUDE: 
• Records of arrests or convictions  
(specialty consumer reports, such as 
employment background screenings, often 
include arrests and convictions) 
• Marriage records or adoptions 
• Civil suits that haven't resulted in judgments 
157 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 
TERMS IN THIS SECTION: 
• Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
• Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
• Discharge 
NOTE 
The three nationwide credit reporting 
companies are required to ensure that new and 
existing public record information that they 
use comes from sources that include specific 
information about you. This includes your 
name, address, and either your Social Security 
number or date of birth. This is to help keep 
the information accurate. The credit reporting 
companies update this every 90 days. 


--- Page 159 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Collection agency account information 
Public records 
Big City Wisconsin Court Docket# 200900001467  
515 C St, NE, Big City, WI 43528 
 
Date filed: 8/3/2019 
Amount: $11,987 
Type: Chapter 7 Bankruptcy 
Responsibility: Individual 
Big City Municipal Court Docket #200700056712 
4326 Fourth Street, SW, Big City, WI 43530 
Date filed: 4/14/2017 
Amount: $4,763 
Type: Civil Judgment 
Responsibility: Individual 
Plaintiff: Bank of Big City 
Plaintiff attorney: Lisa Perry 
Collections 
Reliable collections (Y76381): Account #3629 
Original creditor: ABC Megastore 
Amount placed: $2,500 
Opened: 7/2/2018 
Account type: Open 
Balance: $1,000 
Responsibility: Individual 
INCLUDES: 
• Any accounts with a collection agency 
• The status of those accounts (both past 
and present) 
TERMS IN THIS SECTION: 
• Charge off 
• Default 
• Delinquent 
• Payment status 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
158 


--- Page 160 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account information 
Account information 
Littletown Bank (B62391), Account #2010004637 
Balance: $14,285 
Pay status: 30 days past due 
Date updated: 8/31/2019 
Account type: Automobile 
High balance: $16,500 
Responsibility: Individual 
Past due: $395 
Date opened: 2/5/2019 
Terms: $395/month 48 months 
Payment received: $349 
Account type: Automobile 
Last payment made: 7/5/2019 
8/5/19 
7/5/19 
6/5/19 
5/5/19 
4/5/19 
3/5/19 
Balance 
$14,285 
$14,680 
$14,988 
$15,294 
$15,598 
$15,901 
Scheduled payment 
$395 
$395 
$395 
$395 
$395 
$395 
Amount Paid 
$0 
$395 
$395 
$395 
$395 
$395 
Past Due 
$395 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Rating 
30 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
INCLUDES: 
• Open accounts you currently have and 
closed accounts you had before 
• Company name and account number 
• Date opened 
• Last activity 
• Type of account and status 
• Whether you’re a co-signer, authorized user, 
or guarantor 
• Date closed, if the account is no longer open 
• Credit limit 
• The date information was reported to the 
credit reporting companies 
• Amount currently owed and, if you’re late 
with payments, the balance due (known as 
“items as of date”) 
• Whether you owe a past due amount and the 
number of payments 30, 60, and 90 days late 
• Whether the account was charged off or 
deemed so delinquent that the creditor 
thinks it’s unlikely they’ll be able to collect 
the debt 
TERMS IN THIS SECTION: 
• Charge off 
• Default 
• Delinquent 
• Payment status 
159 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 161 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Account information 
Bank of Wisconsin (B42394), Account #543298760192XXXX51 
Balance: $4,252 
Pay status: Paid or paying as agreed 
Date updated: 8/31/2019 
Account type: Revolving: credit card 
High balance: $9,869 
Responsibility: Individual 
Credit limit: $10,000 
Past due: $0 
Date opened: 6/1/2008 
8/2019 
7/2019 
6/2019 
5/2019 
4/2019 
3/2019 
2/2019 
Balance 
$4,252 
$4,295 
$4,338 
$4,382 
$4,426 
$4,471 
$4,647 
Scheduled payment 
$122 
$123 
$124 
$125 
$127 
$289 
$130 
Amount Paid 
$122 
$123 
$124 
$125 
$127 
$289 
$0 
Past Due 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$130 
Rating 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
30 
1/2019 
12/2018 
11/2018 
10/2018 
9/2018 
8/2018 
7/2018 
Balance 
$4,563 
$4,609 
$4,656 
$4,703 
$4,751 
$4,799 
$4,847 
Scheduled payment 
$130 
$132 
$133 
$135 
$136 
$137 
$139 
Amount Paid 
$130 
$132 
$133 
$135 
$136 
$137 
$139 
Past Due 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Rating 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
OK 
This example is fictional. The credit card 
payment schedule is based on a credit card 
with a 22% percent APR. In this example, the 
individual is paying down a balance of $4,252, 
paying the minimum payment each month 
calculated at the greater of $25 or the sum of 1% 
of the principal balance, finance charges, and 
fees. He is not using the card to make additional 
purchases. While credit card companies use 
a variety of methods to determine finance 
charges, a simple interest calculation was used 
for the purposes of this example. Amounts 
were rounded to the nearest dollar. Making the 
minimum payment, it will take the consumer 17 
years and 9 months to pay off this credit card 
debt. He will also pay $6,731 in interest assuming 
no late fees. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
160 


--- Page 162 ---
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Inquiries made to your account 
INQUIRIES MADE TO YOUR ACCOUNT 
Inquiries that display to others 
The following companies have received your credit report. 
Auto Loan Store  
90 President Lane, Big City, WI 43529 
Requested on: 6/2019 
Super Store 
100 First Street, Anytown, IA 78691 
Requested on: 12/2018 
Promotional inquiries 
The following companies received your name, address and other limited information about you 
so they could make a firm offer of credit or insurance. They did not receive your full credit report. 
These are not displayed to others and do not affect your credit scores. 
Dress for Success Fashion House 
31 Fashion Lane, Big City, WI 43530 
Requested on: 7/2019 
EZ Loan Store 
220 4th Avenue, Littletown, MI 09876 
Requested on: 4/2018 
Account review inquiries  
The companies listed below obtained information from your consumer report for the 
purpose of an account review of business transaction. These are not displayed to others 
and do not affect your credit scores. 
Bank of Wisconsin 
457 State Street, Big City, WI 43532 
Requested on: 6/2019 
INCLUDES: 
• Hard inquiries are made by lenders after 
you apply for credit. These inquiries may 
affect your credit score. This is because 
most credit scoring models look at how 
recently and frequently you apply for credit. 
• Soft inquiries are reviews of your credit file 
when you have not sought to establish a 
new credit account. They include reviews of 
existing accounts by lenders, prescreening 
inquiries by prospective lenders, and your 
requests for your annual credit report. These 
won’t affect your credit score. 
161 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 163 ---
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS CREDIT REPORTING COMPANIES USE 
Authorized user 
A person permitted to use a credit card account, but who is not 
responsible for making payment on the account. The payment status of 
the account (positive or negative) can be shown on the credit report of 
both the authorized user and the account’s owner. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
162 
Chapter 7 
bankruptcy 
A legal process in which the consumer’s assets are used to pay off 
creditors. Any eligible debts not paid through the assets are discharged. 
This will be in the public records section of the credit report. 
Chapter 13 
bankruptcy 
A legal process in which a consumer enters into a payment plan to pay off 
creditors using future income. These are arranged by the courts. Once 
the payment plan is complete, remaining eligible debts are discharged. 
This will be in the public records section of the credit report. 
Charge off 
When a business decides an account is uncollectible. However,  
the consumer is still responsible for the debt, and collections will 
likely continue on this debt. A debt may be charged off after the lender 
has tried to collect it for some time. This doesn’t mean that the debt 
itself is erased—the consumer still legally owes the debt, and it can be 
collected. In many cases the right to collect the debt is taken over by a 
collection agency. 
Closed date 
The date an account is closed. An account can be closed by the business 
or the consumer. If there is still a balance when the account is closed, the 
consumer is still responsible for paying it. 
Default 
The consumer is not meeting the requirements agreed to when taking 
out the loan. An account that has been delinquent (late) for several 30-
day billing cycles is generally considered to be in default. 
Delinquent 
An account that hasn’t been paid on time and is late. Generally 
delinquencies are expressed as being 30, 60, 90, or 120 days or more 
delinquent. 
Discharge 
When the court releases a consumer of responsibility for a debt as part of 
the bankruptcy process. 
Dispute 
Consumers have a right to challenge and require investigation of 
information they believe is incorrect on their credit reports. Consumers 
must start the dispute process. 
End user 
The business or individual that receives a credit report. 


--- Page 164 ---
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS CREDIT REPORTING COMPANIES USE 
Information 
provider or 
furnisher 
A business or individual that reports information to a credit  
reporting company. 
Payment status 
The history of the account including on-time payments as well as 
delinquencies and other negative items. 
You can get a free credit report from each of the three nationwide credit reporting 
companies once every 12 months. Order your free credit reports at AnnualCreditReport.com. 
Use the “Requesting your free credit reports” tool to get started. 
Through December 31, 2026, all U.S. consumers can get six free credit reports every 12 months 
from Equifax by establishing a "myEquifax" account at equifax.com/personal/credit-report-
services/free-credit-reports or by calling 866-349-5191. That’s in addition to the one free 
Equifax report (plus your Experian and TransUnion reports) you can get at 
AnnualCreditReport.com. 
Some websites that offer free credit reports may be trying to sell you something. 
Some companies offer free credit reports, but you may have to buy another product or 
service to get them. Go to AnnualCreditReport.com to get your free annual credit report. 
You can get additional free credit reports during a year if: 
• You’re unemployed and plan to look for a job in the next 60 days 
• You receive public assistance 
• You believe that your credit file is inaccurate due to fraud 
• Your report has recently been changed due to a disputed error 
• You had a consumer reporting company place an initial fraud alert on your credit file 
• You had a consumer reporting company place an extended fraud alert on your credit file 
• You’ve been denied things like credit, employment, or insurance because 
of information in your credit report—in this case, you have 60 days to request your report 
from when you get the notice 
In a few states, state law also gives you a second free annual report. By law, a credit reporting 
company can’t charge more than $12.50 for an additional credit report 
(as of 2018). 
163 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 165 ---
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
CREDIT REPORTS FOR MINORS 
If you’re under 18, you won’t have a credit report unless you: 
• Are an authorized user or joint owner on an account 
• Are an emancipated minor 
• Live in a state that allows you to enter contracts below the age of 18 and you’ve done so 
• Have student loans 
If none of these apply to you and you have a credit report earlier than age 18, you may have 
been the victim of identity theft or credit or financial fraud.  Federal law provides protections 
related to credit records and identity theft for minors under the age of 16, or "protected 
consumers." Persons with authority to act for these protected consumers can request a 
security freeze. If the nationwide credit reporting company does not have a file on the 
protected consumer at the time the security freeze is requested, the company will create a 
record in order to freeze the record for the protected consumer.  This record of the protected 
consumer may only be used to freeze the record to protect against identity theft and may not 
be used for credit purposes. 
Equifax allows the parent or legal guardian to order a minor’s credit report by 
calling (877) 784-2528. 
Experian allows minors age 14 and older (or their guardians) to obtain their own credit report 
by mail or by calling (800) 311-4769. Parents or guardians of minors 13 years or under may 
request a minor’s credit report by mailing or electronically uploading a request form and 
supporting documents to Experian. Forms and instructions are available at experian.com. 
TransUnion allows a parent or legal guardian to order a minor’s credit report. A report is 
only available if the minor has a legitimate credit history (they are the joint owner or an 
authorized user on an account). You can send an email to childidtheft@transunion.com to 
see if a credit file exists. Or you can go to transunion.com and complete the Child Identity 
Theft Inquiry Form. 
Read more about credit reports for minors at consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb/1271. 
If you work with youth in foster care, there are special rules set up for how to get their credit 
reports. Learn more at consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb/1871. 
WHAT TO DO ABOUT ERRORS ON YOUR CREDIT REPORTS 
If you find something wrong on your credit report, you should dispute it. You can contact 
either the credit reporting company (most often Equifax, Experian, or TransUnion) directly or 
the company that provided the incorrect information (the information furnisher or creditor). 
It can be a good idea to contact both. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
164 


--- Page 166 ---
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Here’s how it works: 
• File your dispute with the information furnisher or the credit 
reporting company. 
• They generally have 30 days to investigate your dispute. 
• If you submit additional information after filing your original dispute, they get 
another 15 days to investigate. 
• They must send you written notice of the result within five business days of 
completing the investigation. 
• If the dispute results in a business changing the information it furnished or 
reported to a credit reporting company about you, they must notify the credit 
reporting companies of the change. 
• If you filed your dispute with a credit reporting company and they find 
information to be inaccurate or incomplete, or that it can’t be verified, the 
credit reporting company must delete the item or correct the information in 
your file and notify the furnisher of the error. 
You also have a right to an additional free annual credit report to ensure the errors 
have been fixed. 
If the dispute isn’t handled or an error isn’t fixed in a timely manner, you can also 
submit a complaint to the CFPB at consumerfinance.gov/complaint or by calling 
(855) 411-2372. 
Use the “Disputing errors on your credit reports” tool to help you get started with 
the dispute process. 
Credit scores 
WHAT ARE CREDIT SCORES? 
Credit scores are calculated using the information in credit reports. A higher score 
makes it easier to qualify for a loan or lower interest rates. 
Credit scores vary because different companies may look at different information 
about you and use different formulas for calculating your scores. Scoring 
companies may also create different credit scores that are used when you apply for 
different types of credit. 
As a result, you have more than one credit score. Banks, credit card companies, 
and lenders may use different credit scores to make decisions about offering 
you credit. 
165 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 167 ---
 
 
  
 
 
 
1
HOW ARE CREDIT SCORES CALCULATED? 
Scoring companies have different mathematical formulas to calculate credit scores, 
all typically starting with the information from your credit report. Two of the most 
commonly used credit scores are FICO (calculated using formulas from Fair Isaac 
Corporation) and VantageScore (calculated using formulas from VantageScore 
Solutions). Each of these companies produces multiple versions of their scores 
for different purposes. These scores usually range from 300 to 850. A FICO score 
above 700 is considered good by most businesses, and scores of 750 and higher 
are considered the best. 
FICO shares this information with the public about what goes into its scores:10 
10% New credit 
10%Types of 
credit used 
15% Length of 
credit history 
35% Payment history 
30% Amounts owed 
Payment history tracks whether you’re paying your bills on time. This is the biggest 
factor in your FICO scores. Paying bills late, not paying bills at all, and having bills 
that go to collections will likely cause your scores to drop. Paying your bills on time 
may help increase your scores. 
Amounts owed tracks what you owe, including debts that you are paying down 
over time. It also includes your credit utilization rate, which is how much of your 
available credit you’re using. When the credit that’s available to you decreases 
because you’ve used a portion of it and now owe money, your scores may drop. 
Length of credit history tracks how long you’ve had credit accounts—the longer 
the history, the more positive affect on your scores. A long credit history provides 
strong evidence of how you use credit and patterns of your payment behavior. 
10 Pie chart values are from FICO. See myfico.com. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
166 


--- Page 168 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
New credit is tracked by measuring credit inquiries about you made by creditors 
and others. If there are too many inquiries, it may signal that you have a high 
demand for credit. Because this may be an indicator of risk, your scores may drop. 
Your scores are not affected at all when you check your credit reports yourself. 
Types of credit used are also considered. For example, your FICO scores may 
increase if you have both revolving credit (such as credit cards) and other types of 
credit, such as a mortgage or an auto loan that you repay in installments, in good 
standing. Generally, it’s considered a good thing to have a mix of credit, such as a 
mortgage, an auto loan, and not too many credit cards. 
VantageScore shares this information with the public about how its scores 
are calculated.11 
Factors that influence VantageScore credit scores 
Payment history
Extremely inﬂuential 
Age and type of credit
Highly inﬂuential 
Percent of credit limit used 
Highly inﬂuential 
Total balances/debt
Moderately inﬂuential 
Available credit 
Less inﬂuential 
Recent credit behavior and inquiries
Less inﬂuential 
11 "Age of credit" refers to the length of time accounts have been open. 
167 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 169 ---
 
 
  
 
 
3
GETTING YOUR CREDIT SCORES 
Usually, you have to pay for a credit score. Some lenders, such as credit card 
companies, may provide you a credit score for free on your account statement or 
when you log onto your account online or through a mobile app.12 
There are certain instances where you’re entitled to a free credit score. For 
example, if you’re denied a loan on the basis of your credit score, the lender must 
send you a notice telling you this and include your score. 
Since there are many credit scores you can purchase in the marketplace, the one 
you purchase will most likely differ from the credit score used by a bank, lender, 
or other third party to assess your creditworthiness. There’s no way to know how 
much these scores will vary so the scores you purchase can’t give you an exact 
guide for how creditors will view your credit quality. Knowing what’s in your  
credit report and fixing errors is more important when building your credit than 
paying to find out a credit score. A credit score may be a good initial indication of 
your credit standing, but it can’t tell you all you need to know before you apply 
for a loan. 
Using credit 
CREDIT UTILIZATION 
The amount of credit you’re using compared to the limit on your credit accounts is 
your “credit utilization rate.” 
Many experts advise keeping your use of credit to no more than 30 percent  
of your total credit limit on your revolving credit accounts (for example, the total 
limit on all your credit cards combined). For example, if your total available credit 
is $10,000, you should have a balance of $3,000 or less. Experts advise to keep a 
lower credit utilization rate because credit scoring formulas penalize you for using 
too much of the credit available to you. High usage may lower your credit score. 
12 See consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/millions-of-consumers-will-now-have-access-to-
credit-scores-and-reports-through-nonprofit-counselors/ 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
168 


--- Page 170 ---
 
Here’s how you can figure out your credit utilization rate: 
If you only have one credit card with a $5,000 credit limit, and you have 
charged $3,500 on this card, your credit utilization rate is 
$3,500 (amount charged to credit card) divided by $5,000 (credit limit) = 0.7  
or 70 percent 
If you set a goal of lowering your credit utilization rate to 25 percent or less, 
your credit card balance should be no more than $1,250, or $5,000 (the credit 
limit) multiplied by .25 (25 percent). 
You don’t know when a credit card company will report your balance to credit 
reporting companies. If at any time during the month your credit utilization rate 
is higher than the rate the scoring model thinks is appropriate, you run the risk of 
lowering your credit scores. This means that the amount you have charged on a 
credit card can affect your credit scores even if you pay that amount down at the 
end of the month. 
EXPANDING ACCESS TO CREDIT 
CFPB research shows that roughly 45 million consumers may be denied access 
to credit because they do not have credit records that can be scored. Sometimes 
known as “credit invisibles,” these consumers potentially face higher costs for 
borrowing money and barriers to housing and employment. You might want credit 
to start a business or buy a house or car, or you might just want credit that comes 
with better terms, including a lower interest rate. A limited credit history can make 
it very difficult for a lender to use a credit scoring model to calculate a score  
for you. 
Some consumers are considered “unscorable” because they have a thin credit 
file (an insufficient credit history) or a stale credit file (no recent credit history). 
Consumers without a credit history are “invisible” to the nationwide credit 
reporting companies because they have no records for them to create a credit 
report or credit scores. 
If you don’t have a credit history and want to build one, use the “Getting and 
keeping a good credit history” tool to take your first steps. 
You can learn more about people who are “credit invisible” at consumerfinance.
gov/practitioner-resources/economically-vulnerable/expanding-credit-access/ 
 
169 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 171 ---
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
What's inside 
This module has three tools and one handout to help you understand the 
importance of credit reports and scores. 
Here are suggestions for how to make the most of the time you have. 
If you have... 
10 MINUTES 
• Complete “Requesting your free credit reports” to plan when you’re going to 
order your free annual credit reports 
30 MINUTES 
• Complete “Reviewing your credit reports” to make sure all the information in 
them is correct and up to date 
• Review the “Disputing errors on your credit reports” handout to learn how you 
can dispute mistakes on your reports 
MULTIPLE SESSIONS 
• Complete all three items described above to make sure the information on 
your credit reports is correct 
• Use “Getting and keeping a good credit history” to pick strategies you can 
implement to improve your credit scores 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
170 


--- Page 172 ---
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 GETTING STARTED 
Requesting your free credit reports 
Make a plan for requesting your free credit reports once  
every 12 months. 
Your credit report can be used for more than just a loan approval. That’s why it’s 
important to look at your reports each year to make sure your information is correct. 
You should request your credit report from all three nationwide credit reporting 
companies—Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion—since each report can have 
different information in it. Learn more about requesting credit reports for minors 
at consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb/1271. If you work with youth in foster care, visit 
consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb/1871. 
What to do 
• 
Pick a method to order your credit reports. You can get them online, by phone, or 
by mail. If you get your reports online, be sure you’re accessing them from a safe and 
secure device and location. Be very cautious doing this on public computers, since 
you’re accessing sensitive personal information and you want to keep it safe. 
• 
Be ready to answer some security questions if you request your report online or by 
phone. You’ll be asked questions that are meant to be hard for anyone but you. If you 
can’t answer, you’ll have to request the report by mail. Questions might be: 
• 
How much is your monthly mortgage or car payment? 
• 
Which bank is your auto loan from? 
• 
Decide when you’ll order each report. Consider getting a report from a different 
credit reporting company every four months, as a way to monitor your credit for free. 
A step further 
Review your credit reports carefully. They’ll probably be similar, but there may be 
differences between them, and that’s okay. The most important thing is to make sure that 
the information listed about you is accurate. Use the “Reviewing your credit reports” tool 
to check your credit reports for any mistakes. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
171 


--- Page 173 ---
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
..
Pick a strategy for Requesting your 
free credit reports 
1. Pick when you'll request your credit reports using the strategy that works best for you. 
2. Write down when you'll request them from each company, Experian, Equifax, and TransUnion. 
You can get a free report from each company once every 12 months. 
3. Create a reminder on your calendar or phone to help you follow through. 
Strategies for requesting your credit reports 
REQUEST ON THREE SEPARATE DATES 
REQUEST ON A SINGLE DATE 
Check your reports on three different  
dates throughout the year. Staggering  
them can help you see if anything is 
changing throughout the year or if any  
fraud has occurred. 
Choose a single date that's easy to remember, 
like a birthday or holiday, to request all three 
of your reports at once. This is good if you're 
buying something big soon, that requires new 
credit, so you can correct errors right away. 
I will request my reports on these three 
separate dates: 
DATE 
COMPANY 
Equifax 
Experian 
TransUnion 
I will request a report from all three 
companies on this day: 
DATE 
COMPANY 
Equifax, Experian, TransUnion 
How to request your free reports 
The federal government authorizes only one 
source for your free credit reports. You can make 
a request online, by phone, or by mail. 
Visit AnnualCreditReport.com 
Call (877) 322-8228 
Request by mail. Download and complete 
the form at annualcreditreport.com/
manualRequestForm.action
 
. 
Mail the completed form to: 
Annual Credit Report Request Service 
P.O. Box 105281 
Atlanta, GA 30348-5281 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
172 


--- Page 174 ---
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 GETTING STARTED 
Reviewing your credit reports 
Look through your credit reports carefully to make sure all the 
information is correct. 
Errors on your credit reports can negatively affect your credit scores and ability to get a 
loan. Reviewing your reports on a regular basis can also help you monitor for things like 
identity theft and fraud. 
Sometimes your information isn’t reported to all three nationwide credit reporting 
companies. As a result, some things may not be listed on all three reports, especially 
information about older accounts, accounts you’ve closed, or some of your older jobs  
or addresses. 
This can cause inconsistencies among your credit reports. It’s most important to make 
sure that the information that is listed on each report is correct. 
What to do 
• 
Start by getting free copies of your credit reports. Use the “Requesting your free 
credit reports” tool to find out how. 
• 
Read through each credit report carefully, using the checklist as a guide for what 
errors to look for. 
A step further 
If you find any mistakes on your credit reports, you should dispute them. Use the 
“Disputing errors on your credit reports” tool to get started. 
If you're worried about fraud or identity theft and want to monitor your credit, you can 
get six free credit reports every 12 months from Equifax through December 31, 2026 by 
establishing a "myEquifax" account at equifax.com/personal/credit-report-services/free-
credit-reports/ or by calling 866-349-5191. That’s in addition to the one free 
Equifax report (plus your Experian and TransUnion reports) you can get at 
AnnualCreditReport.com. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
173 


--- Page 175 ---
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
      
 
 
      
 
      
      
      
 
      
    
Monitor and find errors by Reviewing 
your credit reports regularly. 
1. Make a copy of this tool, one for each of the three nationwide credit reporting companies. 
2. Use the checklist to review the five sections of each of your credit reports. 
3. Write down any questions you have or incorrect information you need to dispute. 
Name of credit reporting company: 
SECTION 
IS THIS INFORMATION CORRECT? 
QUESTIONS OR ERRORS 
Header and 
identifying 
information 
My name (including spelling) 
 
My Social Security number 
My current telephone number 
My current address 
My previous addresses
     My employment history 
 
Public record 
information 
My financial public record 
information, like bankruptcies, 
judgments, or tax liens 
 
Collection agency 
account information 
My accounts, if any, in 
collections 
  The status of each of  
my accounts 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
174 


--- Page 176 ---
 
 
 
 
 
      
     
      
      
      
 
SECTION 
IS THIS INFORMATION CORRECT? 
QUESTIONS OR ERRORS 
 
Credit account 
information 
All of the accounts are mine 
T he status of each of  
my accounts, such as whether 
they are open or closed; and 
whether I paid on time, missed 
payments, or paid less than the 
amount due. 
I'm accurately listed as an 
authorized user, co-signer, or 
joint owner 
All accounts I've closed 
are listed as "closed by the 
consumer" 
 
Inquiries made to 
your account 
I recognize all "hard inquiries" 
or times when I've applied for 
credit and a lender reviewed 
my credit report. To learn 
more about inquiries, visit 
consumerfinance.gov/ask-cfpb/ 
whats-a-credit-inquiry-en-1317 
175 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 177 ---
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
.
Disputing errors on your 
credit reports 
If you find mistakes on your 
credit reports, you should 
dispute them. Here’s how you 
can dispute errors you find. 
Errors can appear on one or more of your 
credit reports due to an error in the information 
provided about you or as the result of fraud or 
identity theft.  
If you find errors on your credit reports, you 
should dispute them with the credit reporting 
company (most often Equifax, Experian, or 
TransUnion) and the furnisher of the information. 
GETTING READY TO DISPUTE 
Review the mistakes you identified in the 
“Reviewing your credit reports” tool. Then 
gather any documents you have that support 
your dispute. 
This can include things like: 
• 
Your credit report with the mistake 
circled or highlighted 
• 
Copies of anything that proves there 
is an error—for example, if your report 
incorrectly shows that you’re late paying 
a credit card, make copies of bills or 
cleared checks (or money order stubs) 
that show you’ve paid on time 
• 
Copies of your Social Security card, birth 
certificate, or other personal identity 
information, if you’re disputing a mistake 
related to that information 
If you suspect that the error on your report is 
a result of identity theft, visit identitytheft.gov. 
See Module 9: Protecting your Money for more 
information about identity theft and steps to 
take if you are a victim, including filing a fraud 
alert or security freeze. 
SUBMITTING THE DISPUTE 
You can submit a dispute to the credit reporting 
company by phone, by mail, or online. Explain 
the error and what you want changed. Clearly 
identify each mistake separately, state the facts, 
explain why you are disputing the information, 
and request that it be removed or corrected. 
Some of the credit reporting companies 
provide a dispute form you can use. You’ll also 
want to send a letter explaining the mistake(s)— 
there’s a letter template you can use on the 
next page. 
Make sure you also include copies of all of your 
supporting documentation. Keep your originals. 
You can also choose to send a copy of the 
dispute to the business or individual that 
provided the incorrect information (furnisher). 
You can usually find that address on your 
credit report. 
If you’re mailing the dispute information, it’s a 
good idea to use certified mail with a return 
receipt requested, if that’s available to you. That 
way, the post office will send a postcard telling 
you when your dispute letter was delivered. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
176 


--- Page 178 ---
 
WAITING FOR MISTAKES TO GET FIXED 
The credit reporting company generally has 
30 calendar days (45 days in some cases) to 
investigate your dispute. They have five  
business days to notify you of the results  
once the investigation is complete. 
If the error is fixed, you’ll receive a copy of your 
updated credit report, which doesn’t count as 
your free annual report. 
If, as a result of your dispute, a furnisher 
determines they sent the wrong information  
to a credit reporting company, they must send 
the correction to various credit reporting 
companies to which they had provided the 
incorrect information. 
IF YOU DISAGREE WITH THE RESULTS 
You can send the credit reporting company a 
letter stating you don’t agree with the outcome. 
The credit reporting company has to clearly 
note that the information has been disputed and 
provide your explanation on any future reports. 
You can also submit a complaint with the CFPB at 
consumerfinance.gov/complaint. We'll forward it 
to the company and work to get you a response. 
See Module 9: Protecting your Money for more 
information on how to submit a complaint. 
You may also want to seek assistance from a 
lawyer. Learn more at consumerfinance.gov/
askcfpb/1549. 
Ways to contact the credit reporting companies 
EQUIFAX 
EXPERIAN. 
TRANSUNION 
Online 
equifax.com/personal/ 
disputes 
experian.com/disputes 
transunion.com/credit-
freeze/ 
Mail 
Mail letter explaining 
mistakes and 
completed  
dispute form 
Mail letter explaining 
mistakes 
Mail letter explaining 
mistakes and 
completed dispute 
form 
Dispute form: 
equifax.com/cp/ 
MailInDislcosure 
Request.pdf 
Dispute form: 
None needed 
Dispute form: 
transunion.com/ 
docs/rev/personal/ 
InvestigationRequest.pdf 
Mail to:  
Equifax Information 
Services LLC 
P.O. Box 740256 
Atlanta, GA 30348 
Mail to:  
Experian 
P.O. Box 4500 
Allen, TX 75013 
Mail to:  
TransUnion Consumer 
Solutions 
P.O. Box 2000 
Chester, PA 19016 
Phone 
(800) 864-2978 
(888) 397-3742 
(800) 916-8800 
17
 
7 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 179 ---
 
 
  
 
I am writing to dispute information that appears on my 
consumer report. 
I am disputing the items on the following page. Please investigate the items I have 
described below, make necessary corrections and notify me when complete. 
Thank you for your assistance. Sincerely, 
Name 
My information 
Name and return address 
Phone number 
-
-
Date of birth (any format) 
Today's date 
Credit reporting company name and address 
Report confirmation number, if available 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
178 


--- Page 180 ---
 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
I am disputing the following: 
My report includes accounts with a reported name that is different  
than mine. 
I don’t recognize the accounts in question. 
The report shows I owed money to the company that I have already repaid. 
The current status of my account is not correct. The report shows that I am 
delinquent but I have made all of my payments on time.  
I’m the victim of identity theft and I don’t recognize one or more of the 
accounts on my report. 
Other, see additional information. 
Additional information about the disputed item 
Description including account numbers, dates, source of disputed information (like a company or bank), previous 
addresses related to the dispute 
   I have attached a copy of my report with the issues in question circled. 
179 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 181 ---
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 GETTING STARTED 
Getting and keeping a good  
credit history 
Whether you’ve already established a credit history or are 
just starting out, there are things you can do to improve and 
maintain your credit history. 
There’s no one secret formula for building a strong credit history. But there are some 
healthy habits you can adopt that may help you improve your credit history and keep it in 
good standing. 
Your strategy might be different depending on if you’re building a new credit history or 
trying to improve your existing credit history. 
These strategies don’t affect your credit scores right away. It takes time, so keep working 
on them. 
What to do 
• 
Identify a strategy for improving and maintaining your credit history that works  
for you. 
• 
Implement that strategy and monitor how your credit score improves. 
• 
Once you’re done with your first strategy, pick a new one and keep practicing good 
habits to maintain a strong credit history. 
A step further 
Building and maintaining a good credit history is an ongoing activity. Make a habit of 
reviewing your credit reports each year. Pick a date you’ll remember, like your birthday or 
a holiday. Use the “Requesting your free credit reports,” “Reviewing your credit reports,” 
and “Disputing errors on your credit reports” tools to make it easier to get your reports, 
review them for errors, and make corrections if needed. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
180 


--- Page 182 ---
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
     
    
Build habits for Getting and keeping 
a good credit history. 
1. Read the different strategies for improving and maintaining your credit history. 
2. Check the box of one that you can commit to trying now. 
3. Once that one is complete, try one or two more to keep improving your score. 
HABIT 
TIPS FOR IMPROVING YOUR CREDIT 
 I'll pay my loan and utility 
bills on time, every time. 
Missing bill payments may hurt your credit scores because it 
may establish a poor payment history and can lead to debt 
collection.  Help make sure your payments are on time by 
setting up automatic payments or electronic reminders. If 
you’ve missed payments, get current and stay current. You can 
use the “Bill calendar” (in Module 4) to help track when your 
bills are due and decide when you’ll pay them. 
 I'll spend under my 
credit limit and won't 
get anywhere close to 
"maxing out" my  
credit cards. 
Credit scoring models look at how close you are to being 
“maxed out,” so try to keep your balances low compared to your 
total credit limit. Experts advise keeping your use of  
credit (credit utilization) at no more than 30 percent of your  
total credit limit. 
If you close some of your credit card accounts and put most 
or all of the balances onto a single card, your total credit limit 
may be lower than before. If doing this means that you’re using 
a higher percentage of your total limit than you were before, it 
may hurt your credit scores because it’s increasing your credit 
utilization. In some cases, it’s better to leave credit cards open 
even if you don’t use them, to increase your total credit limit. 
But it depends on how many cards you have and if you can 
avoid using all of them. 
 I 'll pay off my credit  
card balance on time 
each month. 
If you use credit cards, try to pay your balances off each 
month. Paying off the balance each month may help you get 
better scores. You’ll build a credit history by paying it off on 
time and keeping your balance low. Think about setting up text 
alert reminders for when your bill is due, to help you pay on time. 
MODULE 7: UNDERSTANDING CREDIT REPORTS AND SCORES 
181 


--- Page 183 ---
 
     
     
     
HABIT 
TIPS FOR IMPROVING YOUR CREDIT 
 I'll only apply for credit 
that I need. 
Credit scoring formulas look at your recent credit activity as 
a signal of your need for credit. If you apply for a lot of credit 
over a short period of time, it may appear to lenders that your 
economic circumstances have changed for the worse. 
  I'll make sure that 
negative information on 
my credit reports (like 
judgments, bankruptcies, 
or evictions) is accurate. 
 If it’s not accurate or if it’s listed multiple times, submit a 
dispute with the credit reporting company and the company 
that provided the information (the furnisher). You can use the 
“Disputing errors on your credit reports” tool to get started. 
 I'll use credit building 
products to establish a 
credit history if I'm new to 
using credit. 
Secured credit cards can be a way to build a positive credit 
history if you’re just starting out. You typically need to provide 
the deposit upfront, so you’ll need to have enough money 
saved for the deposit before you open one. Because credit 
limits tend to be low with these cards, be sure to watch your 
credit utilization rate and avoid getting too close to using the 
full limit. 
Credit builder loans help you avoid taking on debt while you 
build a positive payment record. With some loans, you make 
monthly payments first, and receive the loan amount when it’s 
paid off. 
These loans can be very effective in creating new history and 
can have a positive affect on your credit reports and scores. 
Some non-profit organizations provide access to secured credit 
cards or credit builder loans. Be sure to ask about the terms, 
just like you would ask a bank or credit union for details about 
its products. 
182 
YOUR MONEY, YOUR GOALS TOOLKIT 


--- Page 184 ---